Survival Analysis for Avian Ecologists: Moving beyond Mayfield

	Proper estimation of survival rates is critical for understanding many topics 
that are the focus of avian ecologists, yet the methods for obtaining such estimates 
are varied and can be challenging to learn. Moreover, survival analyses require different 
assumptions and considerations relative to other types of modeling approaches that are 
commonplace in avian ecology. In this workshop, we will focus on training participants 
in modern statistical approaches for quantifying survival during two important periods 
of the annual cycle of birds: the nest cycle, and the post-fledgling period. 
 
Workshop participants will receive hands-on instruction regarding two distinct modeling 
approaches important to avian ecologists. In the first half of the course, modern 
approaches to developing and testing nest survival models will be taught using 
Program MARK and RMark, in addition to logistic exposure models in R. 

In the second half, survival analyses with Cox Proportional Hazards models will be taught, 
including instruction on the use fixed and time-varying covariates and approaches 
for dealing with censoring, again using R. Within each component, 
discussion of common study design considerations (e.g., sample sizes, 
sampling frequency) will be included, and participants will have time to work through their own datasets.

Workshop participants are expected to have working knowledge of R and a general 
background in statistical modeling. Attendees are expected to bring their own 
laptop loaded with relevant open source software and their own dataset(s) for use in the course,
 and all participants will receive a set of course notes and annotated programs for worked examples.


---------------------------------------------------------------------

Please download and install the following files. You may need administrator access
  to install the software.

  (a) The first part of the course will use RMark which requires the use of MARK.
      You can install MARK from

  
        MARK -       http://www.phidot.org/software/mark/downloads/

      Unfortunately, MARK is Windoze only. If you are a Mac user, you will need a virtualization
      program such as VirtualBox to emulate Windoze.

      The second/third parts of the course use R only so will run on Mac/Windoze/Linux platforms.


  (b) R/Rstudio

      See     
          http://www.stat.sfu.ca/~cschwarz/CourseNotes/HowGetSoftware.html
 
      for details on installation.

      Also install the R packages as listed at this website.
      Be sure to create your own personal library as noted at the above website.

      Also install the RMark, msm,  survival, and survminer  packages from CRAN
      in addition to the other packages.


  (b) Adobe Reader: Course reading will be available in PDF format.
      You will need to call up some of the material to read from the
      screen during the course.
      You will be able to annotate the pdf files.

  (c) Excel: You will need to unzip files containing example datasets.
      Datasets are in an Excel workbook that you will need to open
      and “paste” into your program.

  (d) Text editor: Notepad, WordPad, or Word, to prepare/edit data files.

  (e) CourseMaterial  http://people.stat.sfu.ca/~cschwarz/xxxxx (to come later on)
      You should download and unzip the file to get the full course material.

      You can also download individual files from the webpage.